P8105 Homework 2
================
Riyadh Baksh
2024-10-02

# Problem 1

The code below is used to read the NYC Transit data and saves it into
the `nyc_df` data frame. The cleaned dataset contains information on the
NYC subway, with variables on the line name, the station name, station
latitude, station longitude, routes served, what the entrance type is,
whether there is an entry, whether there is vending service, and whether
it is ADA compliant.

The code chunk below starts to clean the data by re-writing the variable
names in a uniform convention, selecting the variables of interest, and
converting the `entry` and `vending` variables to the logical type.

The resulting dataset contains 1868 rows and 19 columns.

The data frame currently is not completely tidy since the routes served
are represented across many columns, which should instead be condensed
into one “title” column and one “value” column, representing this
information.

``` r
library(tidyverse)

nyc_df = 
  
  read_csv(file = "data/nyc.csv") |>
  
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  
  select(line:entry, vending, ada) |>
  
  mutate(
    entry = case_match(entry, "YES"~1, "NO"~0),
    vending = case_match(vending, "YES"~1, "NO"~0)) |>
  
  mutate(
    entry = as.logical(entry),
    vending = as.logical(vending),
    route8 = as.character(route8),
    route9 = as.character(route9),
    route10 = as.character(route10),
    route11 = as.character(route11),
    )

nyc_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 1,868 × 19
    ##    line     station_name station_latitude station_longitude route1 route2 route3
    ##    <chr>    <chr>                   <dbl>             <dbl> <chr>  <chr>  <chr> 
    ##  1 4 Avenue 25th St                  40.7             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ##  2 4 Avenue 25th St                  40.7             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ##  3 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 N      R      <NA>  
    ##  4 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 N      R      <NA>  
    ##  5 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 N      R      <NA>  
    ##  6 4 Avenue 45th St                  40.6             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ##  7 4 Avenue 45th St                  40.6             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ##  8 4 Avenue 45th St                  40.6             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ##  9 4 Avenue 45th St                  40.6             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ## 10 4 Avenue 53rd St                  40.6             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ## # ℹ 1,858 more rows
    ## # ℹ 12 more variables: route4 <chr>, route5 <chr>, route6 <chr>, route7 <chr>,
    ## #   route8 <chr>, route9 <chr>, route10 <chr>, route11 <chr>,
    ## #   entrance_type <chr>, entry <lgl>, vending <lgl>, ada <lgl>

The code below selects both the `line` and `station_name` variables and
counts the number of distinct observations. There are **465 distinct
stations**.

``` r
select(nyc_df, line, station_name) |>
  distinct() |>
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 465

The chunk below repeats the same process as before, but includes the
`ada` variable. The data is then filtered to include only ADA compliant
stations, and counts the distinct observations. There are **84 ADA
compliant stations**.

``` r
select(nyc_df, line, station_name, ada) |>
  filter(ada == TRUE) |>
  distinct() |>
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 84

The new chunk again repeats the similar process, but now includes
`entry` and `vending` variables. The data is filtered such that
`vending` is false, and `entry` is true, and the number of distinct
observations are counted. There are 43 stations that meet this criteria.
Since there are a total of 465 stations, the **proportion that meet this
criteria is 0.09**.

``` r
select(nyc_df, line, station_name, entry, vending) |>
  filter(vending == FALSE, entry == TRUE) |>
  distinct() |>
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 43

The code below tidies the data frame such that route number and route
name are distinct variables.

``` r
nyc_tidy_df = 
  pivot_longer(
    nyc_df,
    route1:route11,
    names_to = "route_number",
    names_prefix = "route",
    values_to = "route_name")

nyc_tidy_df = drop_na(nyc_tidy_df, route_name)

nyc_tidy_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 4,270 × 10
    ##    line     station_name station_latitude station_longitude entrance_type entry
    ##    <chr>    <chr>                   <dbl>             <dbl> <chr>         <lgl>
    ##  1 4 Avenue 25th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  2 4 Avenue 25th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  3 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  4 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  5 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  6 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  7 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  8 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ##  9 4 Avenue 45th St                  40.6             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ## 10 4 Avenue 45th St                  40.6             -74.0 Stair         TRUE 
    ## # ℹ 4,260 more rows
    ## # ℹ 4 more variables: vending <lgl>, ada <lgl>, route_number <chr>,
    ## #   route_name <chr>

Using the code below, there are **60 distinct stations that serve the A
train**.

``` r
select(nyc_tidy_df, line, station_name, route_name) |>
  filter(route_name == "A") |>
  distinct() |>
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 60

Using the code below, of the stations that serve the A train, **17 are
ADA compliant**.

``` r
select(nyc_tidy_df, line, station_name, route_name, ada) |>
  filter(route_name == "A", ada == "TRUE") |>
  distinct() |>
  nrow()
```

    ## [1] 17

# Problem 2

# Problem 3
